Freud was sometimes seen as a merciless artist, and certainly his belief in capturing the truth as he saw it meant that his eye could see the weakness – the absurdity, even – of any sitter. In Leigh Bowery he found a vast subject, in soul as well as body. His portraits of this British performance artist, who knew he was HIV positive, and would later die from an Aids-related illness, form the greatest cycle of pictures of his career. They are also some of the best portraits painted anywhere in recent times. If Freud's Bowery portraits showed his compassion for a fellow human being, his portrait of Andrew Parker-Bowles is perhaps his most insolent, scathing, and melancholy study of the self. Sprawled in uniform, Parker-Bowles – the former husband of Camilla – evokes, with his red striped trousers, glamorous 19th-century images of officers and imperial heroes. But he looks exhausted, saddened, wiped out. Freud's many self-portraits will undoubtedly be seen as among his finest achievements. No other recent artist has embarked on such a severe and profound process of self-scrutiny over so many years, and Freud must surely himself have been aware of the analogy with Rembrandt. He always used a mirror for self-portraiture, and painted exactly what he saw, so these are portraits, rather than metaphysical self-images. In this painting the angle makes him look like a colossus towering over his two children, a troubling Freudian drama that is one of his most haunting creations. This is Freud's startling modern reinvention of the recumbent nude, a genre that goes back to Giorgione's Sleeping Venus and Titian's Venus of Urbino. Just as Manet made the nude shockingly modern with his Olympia in the 19th century and Picasso with Les Demoiselles d'Avignon in the early 20th century, so in our time Freud proved again that a painting can be timeless and immediate, beautiful and raw. Big people bring out his biggest qualities as an artist. Freud showed his mettle when he refused to paint the Queen any differently from the way he portrays everybody else. The brutally cropped format may suggest he is going further – a hint of republicanism? – but I'm not so sure. Keeping the crown on retains the Shakespearean image of the uneasy royal head; age and anxiety are etched on this face. Freud is a great painter of what it is to be human and he shows it here, in the face of someone regal yet as vulnerable as anyone else.