A jockey's whip is not widely considered to be a wonder of modern technology to match the iPod or the mobile phone but perhaps it should be. "It's your job to educate people," Jim Crowley said at Lingfield Park on Tuesday, shortly before hitting me with one. "The message needs to be got across. This has been blown up out of all proportion. Whips don't hurt horses." It is a line that has been heard many times in the debate over the use of the whip, not least during the current controversy over the British Horseracing Authority's strict new regulations on its use. It is also an argument that many people, perhaps, still find a little difficult to believe. If it doesn't hurt, they say, why use it at all? But Crowley is right. He hit me three times in quick succession on the palm of the hand yesterday afternoon, the third time "as hard as I'd ever hit a horse" and, thanks to the design of his lightweight, foam-cushioned whip, I scarcely felt a thing. It has not always been like this. A decade or so ago a fairly gentle swish from a heavy, old-fashioned whip with a loop of leather at its tip would have produced a smack with a real sting. The modern equivalent, though, is all about noise rather than impact. "A horse wouldn't feel it the same as a human," Crowley said. "They have a tough hide and it's covered with hair. This whip doesn't hurt a human, so it can't hurt a horse and these sticks have been tested and tested to show that they don't hurt the horse. "There's no way a jockey would want to hurt a horse. The sticks nowadays are fantastic and designed to startle the horse with a loud bang. We use them to create that sound, which is what people don't realise, and that's the problem." The lack of any pain from Crowley's strikes is so impressive that it is tempting to wonder whether jockeys should be encouraged to spread the message by hitting racegoers too. Better still, they could walk down Oxford Street hitting passers-by and, when they find that itdoesn't hurt, tell them to tell their friends. "The palm of your hand is one of the most sensitive parts of your body," Crowley said. "You wouldn't want to have a tattoo there but, when you're hit with one of these whips, you hardly feel it. "A friend of mine who was a soldier wanted to have a look at one of these. He wasn't involved in racing at all and his whole perception changed in one second by looking at one of these new whips and realising that they're padded and they don't hurt. "The sticks are getting better and better all the time. They're all tested and they've all got serial numbers in. To be honest, the only problem I have with these sticks is that on a windy day, the wind catches them because they're so light." Three strokes from a whip on the palm of the hand is hardly a controlled scientific experiment. For one thing it could be argued that Crowley, one of the most easy-going members of the weighing room, is simply too pleasant to launch a proper, full-blooded assault on anyone, even a journalist. Ryan Moore or Kieren Fallon, by contrast, might apply themselves to the task with real venom. Having felt the best that Crowley could do, though, I would be happy to let them try. "Hopefully the BHA will come around," Crowley said of the hasty review of the new rules that is due to conclude by the end of this week. "The jockeys just want what's right. The whole situation has been blown out of proportion but what the jockeys have put forward the BHA can hopefully bring into force."